Chapter on Software Checklist (#910)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/content/software_checklist/01/making_software_citable.md

# Making software citable

Digital Object Identifiers are globally unique identifiers which can point to
any digital object, such as a version of a paper, a version of software etc.

> This has the advantage that it is unambigous and standardized. For papers, using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This has the advantage that it is unambigous and standardized. For journal articles, using
```

DOIs is commonplace, and a DOI is usually provided by the publisher. For

> software, you can make your own DOI with [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
software, you can get a DOI by publishing it on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) platform:
```

> 1. You can tell people how to cite your software by including a ``CITATION.cff``

Reviewer: I don't understand the use of double backticks here, usually names of files are in single backticks in markdown

Author: this line was removed

file in the root of your repository (You can read up on the rationale of

> ``CITATION.cff`` files in [this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``CITATION.cff`` files in [Software Sustainability Institute blog post
```

Author: chapter was removed

> blog](https://www.software.ac.uk/blog/2017-12-12-standard-format-citation-files)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on citation files](https://www.software.ac.uk/blog/2017-12-12-standard-format-citation-files)).
```

> However, writing ``CITATION.cff`` files by hand is a bit tedious and error-prone. We recommend using [this online application](https://citation-file-format.github.io/cff-initializer-javascript/) and fill in the provided web form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing ``CITATION.cff`` files by hand is tedious and error-prone. We recommend using [this online application](https://citation-file-format.github.io/cff-initializer-javascript/) and filling in the provided web form.
```

1. Make a [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) account and link it with your GitHub account as explained on [guides.github.com/activities/citable-code](https://guides.github.com/activities/citable-code/).
1. You can tell Zenodo what metadata you want to associate with the software by

> including a ``.zenodo.json`` file in the root of your repository, but writing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
including a ``.zenodo.json`` file in the root of your repository. Writing
```

from the ``CITATION.cff`` file. To do so, you'll need a command line tool
``cffconvert`` which you can install [from
PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/cffconvert/) by:

    ```bash
    pip install --user cffconvert
    ```
1. Make sure that your ``CITATION.cff`` is valid YAML by copy-pasting the
contents to http://www.yamllint.com/.
1. Make sure that your ``CITATION.cff`` is valid CFF, by:

    ```bash
    # (in the repository's root directory)
    cffconvert --validate
    ```

    If the command does not return anything, that means the CFF is valid.

1. Generate the ``.zenodo.json`` file using ``cffconvert`` as follows:

    ```bash
    cffconvert --ignore-suspect-keys --outputformat zenodo --outfile .zenodo.json
    ```
1. On Zenodo, make sure to 'Flip the switch' to the ``on`` position on the
GitHub repository that you want to make a release of.
1. Go to your Github repository, use the _Create a new release_ button to create
a release on GitHub.
1. Zenodo should automatically be notified and should make a snapshot copy of
the current state of your repository (just one branch, without any history), and

> should also assign a persistent identifier (DOI) to that snapshot.

Reviewer: Those things are covered by the citable-code guide, I don't we should repeat it here, only refer to the guide

Author: section was removed

    **when things don't work**

    In case the GitHub-Zenodo integration does not work as expected, there are
    two places to go and look for information:
    1. On GitHub:
        - go to ``https://github.com/<org>/<repo>/``.
        - select ``Settings``.
        - select ``Webhooks``.
        - select select the Zenodo webhook (may require GitHub login).
        - scroll down to ``Recent deliveries``.
        - click on one of the listed deliveries for details on the request, the response, and to request redelivery.
    1. On Zenodo:
        - go to ``https://zenodo.org/account/settings/github/``.
        - select the repository whose diagnostic information you want.
        - click on one of the releases to see the _Payload_ Zenodo received from GitHub, as well as the _Metadata_ that Zenodo has associated with your release, or _Errors_ if there were any.

1. Use the DOI whenever you refer to your software, be it in papers, posters, or
even tweets and blogs.

> 1. Add the software's Zenodo badge to your repository's README.

Reviewer: explain how to do it or add link to the description elsewhere

Author: section was removed

# Making software citable

Digital Object Identifiers are globally unique identifiers which can point to
any digital object, such as a version of a paper, a version of software etc.
This has the advantage that it is unambigous and standardized. For papers, using
DOIs is commonplace, and a DOI is usually provided by the publisher. For
software, you can make your own DOI with [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/):

1. You can tell people how to cite your software by including a ``CITATION.cff``
file in the root of your repository (You can read up on the rationale of
``CITATION.cff`` files in [this
blog](https://www.software.ac.uk/blog/2017-12-12-standard-format-citation-files)).
However, writing ``CITATION.cff`` files by hand is a bit tedious and
error-prone, so instead go to

> https://citation-file-format.github.io/cff-initializer-javascript/ and fill in

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: use proper hyperlink

Reviewer 2: e1f50e706211c37a86013006afe8a757a0ad2fbb fixes this
